# ehrQL tutorial: Filtering and aggregation

---8<-- 'includes/data-builder-danger-header.md'

## Example dataset definition 6a: Filtering and aggregation

### Learning objectives

By the end of this tutorial, you should be able to:

* explain how to filter rows
* implement filtering of rows
* combine filters
* implement aggregation of values

In this tutorial, we will develop more complex queries
and learn how to combine different filters into one statement.
We also learn what sort of inbuild aggregation of values are available within ehrQL.

### Full example

???+ example "Dataset definition: `6a_multiple4_dataset_definition.py`"

    ```python
    ---8<-- "databuilder/ehrql-tutorial-examples/6a_multiple4_dataset_definition.py"
    ```

In this section, we will use two different tables: `patients` and `clinical_events`.
`patients` is, as before, a patient-level table
meaning that each row in the table represents one patient,
and patients can only appear in the table once.

`clinical_events` is another event-level table.
This means that a row is an event like a diagnosis.
Patients can have multiple events and therefore multiple rows in the table.

For brevity, the tables will not be displayed here but can be reviewed in the `example-data/multiple4/` folder.

The output of the query above should generate the table below:

???+ example "Output dataset: `outputs/6a_multiple4_dataset_definition.csv`"

    {{ read_csv('databuilder/ehrql-tutorial-examples/outputs/6a_multiple4_dataset_definition.csv', keep_default_na=False) }}

## Line by line explanation

In this dataset definition, we select details of patients who:

* have had a particular clinical event code recorded
* with an associated numeric value higher than a given threshold
* within a specified date range

We then extract:

* the patient's date of birth
* the maximum numeric value recorded for the patient for the specified clinical event code
* the number of matching clinical events that exceed the given threshold

### Filtering clinical events

We create a variable called `tutorial_code_system_events`.
This filters the clinical events table to include only events
that belong to a coding system called `TutorialCodesystem`.

The `take()` and `drop()` methods allow filtering of table rows:

* `take()` specifies rows that you wish to *include*
* `drop()` specifies rows that you wish to *exclude*

Both `take()` and `drop()` require an expression inside their parentheses
that evaluates to a Boolean `True` or `False` for each row.

In previous tutorials, we have used `take()`.
In this example,
we are going to use `drop` to drop rows for `AnotherCodingSystem`.
Rows that result in a `True` value for this expression then have the filter applied in the result.

### Filter by h1 events

Now we can apply a further filter to generate a new variable called `high_code_h1_events`.
In this filter, we filter by 4 conditions:

1. `code` equal `h1`
2. `numeric_value` is greater than 200
3. `date` is after start date of interest
4. `date` is before end date of interest

We combine these with `&` which means `AND`.

### Aggregation of values

We can perform simple aggregations per patient
and we have already seen some of these such as `exists_for_patient()`.

To our dataset, we use some of the simple numerical aggregations.

First, we add the number of relevant matching clinical events to the dataset,
by counting the events with `count_for_patient()`.
and we find the highest value recorded in those clinical events
by using `maximum_for_patient()`.

## Your Turn

!!! question
    1. In this dataset definition,
       we initially filtered all of the clinical events to those using the `TutorialCodeSystem` code system.
       How would we rewrite that same selection to use a single `drop()`?
    2. How would we find the *sum* of the numeric values of the `m1` clinical events
       for each patient within the same date range already specified?
       Refer to the [ehrQL reference](../reference.md).
    2. As the dataset definition shows,
       we can use combine multiple filters using `take()` and `drop()`
       in different ways.
       Either we can specify multiple conditions to a single `take()` or
       `drop()`.
       Or we can *chain* multiple `take()` and `drop()` methods.
       The output of each method is a frame.

        !!! todo
            Or series?
            Check! Does this work on series, or just frames?

         You may find either way to express the same process useful:
         it may make your dataset definition either clearer
         or more consise to read.

         Can you rewrite the `take()` with multiple conditions to be a series of chained `take()` methods?
         Refer to the [ehrQL reference](../reference.md).

        !!! todo
            In general, do we want to suggest particular ehrQL idioms?
