OpenSAFELY compartmentalises data into different levels depending on the level of disclosivity and the permissions required to access it.

## Level 1
This level includes the complete, raw, patient-identifiable, event-level data.

#### Where is this data held?
Data is held within the EHR vendor's secure environment as part of their routine work.

#### Who has access?
Only data processor staff working for the EHR vendor have access at this level (as well as GP clinical staff who can access the direct for the purposes of direct patient care). No additional access was granted to members of the OpenSAFELY collaborative to access data at this level.

#### Example 

| NHS number | Name | DoB | Event | Date | Practice |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 979384758 | Seb Colbert | 12/3/1971 | 2 month prescription of Glaberol 2mg twice a day. | 30/3/2020 10:31 | Parkway Practice, Birmingham, B1 2JP | 
| 979384758 | Seb Colbert | 12/3/1971 | Diagnosis asthma | 2/12/2012 11:22 | Grove Practice, London, SE5 8AZ |

This example demonstrates the level of detail available in level 1 data. It is not representative of how the data is structured.

## Level 2
This level includes pseudonymised versions of the coded event-level data produced  every week by the EHR vendor for the vendor-OpenSAFELY database. 
It also includes external datasets imported into the database, for instance hospital admissions and death registry data. 
Only data for patients who are present in the EHR database are imported from external datasets.
The schema for this database can be seen [here]().

#### Where is this data held?
Data is held within the EHR vendor's secure environment on the OpenSAFELY server.

#### Who has access?
Researchers who hold honorary contracts with NHS England and have signed Data Access Agreements relevant to level 2 or level 3 access. This includes OpenSAFELY software developers and some researchers.

#### Example

| Pseudonym | Event | Date | Location |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| aj834nasdlk | 2 month prescription of Glaberol 2mg twice a day. | 30/3/2020 10:31 | MSOA (approximate location) | 
| aj834nasdlk | Urea result 7.1 mmol/L | 2/03/2020 09:22 | MSOA | 
| aj834nasdlk | Urea result 8.2 mmol/L | 2/02/2020 10:41 | MSOA |
| aj834nasdlk | Diagnosis asthma | 2/12/2012 11:22 | MSOA | 

This example demonstrates the level of detail available in level 2 data. It is not representative of how the data is structured.


## Level 3
This level includes analysis-ready extracts of level 2 data for specific analyses. I.e., anything that is generated by a [Study Definition](study-def-intro.md).

#### Where is this data held?
Data is held within the EHR vendor's secure environment on the OpenSAFELY server (same as level 2).

#### Who has access
Currently, anyone with level 2 access.

## Level 4
This level includes tables, figures, and other structured outputs produced as a result of the analysis of the level 3 data, for example summary statistics and statistical models. 

#### Where is this data held?
Data is held within the EHR vendor's secure environment on a specific server, separate from the level 2 and 3 server. 
Following scrict disclosivity checks and redactions, these data may be released out of the server via GitHub for public consumption.

#### Who has access
Anyone with level 2/3 access. In addition, researchers who hold honorary contracts with NHS England and have signed Data Access Agreements relevant to level 4 access (who do not have level 2/3 access) for the purposes of checking and redacting data prior to release. 

## Unrestricted level
Any data not considered a disclosure risk which has been released from the level 4 server following strict disclosivity checks. 